*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 66634 ***

                              GUIDE TO THE
                              CANYON AREA


                                                                     15¢

    [Illustration: NATIONAL PARK SERVICE • Department of the Interior]

  This leaflet has been produced to increase your enjoyment of
  Yellowstone National Park by the Yellowstone Library and Museum
  Association in cooperation with the National Park Service. U. S.
  Department of the Interior

                                                                    4/78


There are miles of trails in the Canyon area. Many are well traveled,
short and paved; others are maintained and marked, but not paved.

The elevation of the Canyon rim is about 8000 feet, which makes even the
short walks surprisingly strenuous for many people. Take your time, and
wear good walking shoes or boots. At times it is wise to carry raingear.
On the longer trails you may want to carry water and a lunch, or
whatever food you think necessary.

As you travel, to avoid accidents, watch your footing and please stay on
the trails. Climbing into the Canyon off the established trails is both
dangerous and prohibited by law. Due to the steepness of the Canyon
walls many trails have been constructed in switchback (“zigzag”)
fashion. It is dangerous to cut across switchbacks. You can easily slip
and fall and you might knock rocks down on someone below you. You would
also cause ugly and unnatural erosion of the walls.

Do not throw anything into the canyon. Rocks and other hard objects
might injure someone below you. Litter is unsightly. Removing litter
from the Canyon is a dangerous and expensive job. Please help us keep
the area clean.

If you plan to hike overnight in the backcountry be sure to pick up a
backcountry permit at the Ranger Station. While there you can also
obtain the latest trail information and advice regarding the adequacy of
your equipment for the trip. For longer trips you should purchase a USGS
topographic map of the park. These are available at any Visitor Center.
Permits should be obtained before 5 p.m.

Most trails in Yellowstone are marked with orange or yellow metal tags
tacked to trees or posts. In wooded sections the tags are fairly small
(about 3×5 inches); in meadows they are larger (about 8 inches square).

Please STAY ON THE TRAILS. Getting lost in Yellowstone is no laughing
matter.

The Canyon area, like all of Yellowstone, is grizzly bear country. The
backcountry traveler always runs some risk of an encounter with a bear.
To reduce this risk, make noise as you hike through areas where you
might accidentally startle a bear. Whistle, or attach a bell to your
pack.

In season, guided horseback trips are regularly taken on some of the
Canyon area trails. In addition there are many pleasant half day and
full day rides that can be arranged. The saddle horse concession is
located 1½ miles south of Canyon Junction on the Lake-Canyon road.
Should you wish to bring in your own stock you should write the Chief
Ranger well in advance of your trip for particulars. If you intend to
keep your animals overnight in any of the developed areas they must be
boarded at the horse concession since there are no combined facilities
for grazing and camping.

On the road in Yellowstone you are on the threshold to wilderness. Plan
your off-the-road, wilderness trips with care. Savor the best that your
National Park has to offer—its backcountry. Please take only
pictures—let no one regret that you walked here.


Trail from Grandview to “P” Loop Cabin Area—Park at either end of the
trail. About ½ mile in length, this paved trail is especially pleasant
in the early morning.

Trail to the Brink of the Upper Falls—Park at the Upper Falls parking
area. This is a very short (⅛ mile) walk to the lip of the 109 foot
Upper Falls.

Trail to the Brink of the Lower Falls—Park at the southernmost parking
area on the North Rim Drive. The short (⅜ mile) walk along a paved trail
drops about 600 feet into the Canyon to the brink of the 308 foot Lower
Falls.

Red Rock Point Trail; Lookout Point—Park at the Lookout Point parking
area. The paved trail to Red Rock drops several hundred feet in about ⅜
of a mile. Lookout Point, on the rim, offers essentially the same view
of the Lower Falls as Red Rock, but does not permit the viewer to get as
close to the falls.

Grandview Trail—Park at the Grandview parking area. This is a very short
paved walk to a view of much of the Canyon.

Inspiration Point Trail—Park at the northernmost parking area on the
North Rim Drive. Several steps direct you down this short, paved walk to
an overlook providing a spectacular Canyon View.

North Rim Trail—Portions of this trail are paved. Starting at Chittenden
Bridge, the first ½ mile to the Upper Falls parking area takes the hiker
close to the river, a beautiful and impressive torrent as it approaches
the Canyon. From slightly west of the Upper Falls parking area the trail
continues past Crystal Falls, on Cascade Creek, to the Lower Falls
parking area, another ½ mile, then to Lookout Point (½ mile), to
Grandview Point (¼ mile), and finally to inspiration Point (1⅛ miles).
By trail, Inspiration Point is slightly more than 2¼ miles from the
Upper Falls parking area, and 2⅞ miles from Chittenden Bridge.


Though the full length of all trails is not shown on the map, a number
of longer hikes originate within the mapped area. A brief description of
these trails is given below. Backcountry permits are required for all
overnight hikes.

Howard Eaton Trail to Cascade, Grebe, Wolf, and Ice Lakes, and
Norris—From the trailhead ½ mile west of Canyon Junction on the
Norris-Canyon road the hiker passes through forest, meadow, and
marshland to Cascade Lake (3 miles), Grebe Lake (4¼ miles), Wolf Lake
(6¼ miles), Ice Lake (8½ miles), and Norris (12 miles). With the
exception of the trail up Observation Peak from Cascade Lake, trails in
this area have little vertical rise.

The climb to Observation Peak is strenuous, rising about 1400 feet in 3
miles. From the top the hiker is rewarded with an outstanding view of
some of Yellowstone’s wilderness country.

A second spur from the Howard Eaton Trail in this area takes the hiker
from Cascade Lake to Cascade Lake Picnic Area, which is 1¼ miles north
of Canyon Junction on the Tower-Canyon road. The hiker with limited time
can take a very enjoyable walk from the picnic area to the lake, then on
to the trailhead at the Norris-Canyon road, covering about 5 miles.

A third spur from the Howard Eaton Trail offers easy access to Grebe
Lake from the Norris-Canyon road. About 3 miles west of Canyon Junction,
at the Grebe Lake parking area and trailhead, a 3 mile trail goes
directly into Grebe Lake. When coupled with the Howard Eaton Trail from
either Cascade Lake Picnic Area, or the trailhead ½ mile west of the
junction, half day walks of about 6¼ and 7¼ miles, respectively, are
possible.

Howard Eaton Trail to Tower Fall; Seven Mile Hole—Park at the Glacial
Boulder. Until its juncture with the Howard Eaton Trail, this trail
follows the Canyon rim past a good view of Silver Cord Cascade, at 1½
miles. At almost 2 miles this rim trail joins the Howard Eaton. Continue
north at this junction.

At 3 miles the Seven Mile Hole Trail drops off to the right, 1250
vertical feet in about 2 miles. Hike it carefully, watch your footing,
and conserve your energy. Depending on your condition and the weather,
it can be a long climb back out of Seven Mile Hole.

If you continue north past the Seven Mile Hole Trail junction you will
approach Washburn Hot Springs at about 5¼ miles, and come to another
junction at 6¾ miles.

This is the Mt. Washburn Spur Trail, a secondary trail which climbs
about 2000 feet in a little more than 2¼ miles. This, too, is a long
climb even if you are in good condition. From the top it is 3½ miles
down the other side of the mountain to Dunraven Pass, on the
Tower-Canyon road.

If you continue north from the Mt. Washburn Spur Trail junction you
eventually reach Tower Junction, 20 miles from Glacial Boulder.


Uncle Tom’s Trail—A short walk into the Canyon at the base of the Lower
Falls. Because this is a very strenuous walk, dropping about 500 feet
over a series of stairways and paved inclines, it is not recommended for
people with heart and lung conditions. Much of the walk is constructed
of perforated steel sheeting, so you should wear comfortable,
flat-heeled walking shoes which will not get caught in the mesh.
Portions of the walk are often wet, which in the spring or fall, or in
the early morning, may be a film of ice. For those in good condition
this is a very rewarding walk.

Artist Point Trail—A very short walk from the parking area at the north
end of the South Rim Drive. Many people consider this the best view of
the Lower Falls and much of the Canyon.

Clear Lake Trail—From the Uncle Tom’s Trail parking area this trail
takes the hiker through large rolling meadows and forested areas to
Clear Lake. It is about 2¼ miles roundtrip. Bison and elk may be seen in
these meadows in the early mornings and late afternoons, especially in
the fall. Large ground squirrel populations and an abundance of
succulent grasses and plant roots often attract bears to these meadows
in the spring, where they spend hours digging and grazing.

South Rim Trail—Park at the large lot near Chittenden Bridge. This
partly paved trail parallels the Canyon for 3¼ miles to Sublime Point.
Many striking viewpoints of both falls and the Canyon can be reached on
this trail, as well as access to Uncle Tom’s Trail, Artist Point,
Lilypad Lake (about ¾ of a mile from Artist Point), and Sublime Point
(about 1¼ miles from Artist Point).

Ribbon Lake Trail—From the Chittenden Bridge parking area follow the
markers along the Wapiti Lake Trail until you come to a junction, at
about 3 miles. Bear left (north) at the junction; Ribbon Lake is about ¾
of a mile farther. Connecting trails to Lilypad Lake, Clear Lake, and
the South Rim Trail offer several possible variations to this trip.


As with the longer trails on the north side of the Canyon, the full
length of all trails is not shown on the map, but all of the trips
described below originate on the mapped area. Backcountry permits are
required for all overnight hikes.

Wapiti Lake Trail—Park at Chittenden Bridge parking area. This full
day’s hike up and over the southern end of the heavily forested Mirror
Plateau to Wapiti Lake is a reward in itself for the strong hiker. The
lake is about 18 miles from Chittenden Bridge.

Sour Creek Trail—Park at Chittenden Bridge parking lot. This very
popular riding trail is also a beautiful walk. Allow a little more than
a half a day for the roundtrip walk to Wrangler Lake. Follow the Wapiti
Lake trail for about 1½ miles. Follow the signs at the junction, bearing
right (south) to the lake, an additional 3¼ miles. Most of the way is
through large rolling meadows at the northern end of Hayden Valley. Elk
often graze at Wrangler Lake early and late in the day.

Howard Eaton Trail to Lake—Allow a full day for the hike from Chittenden
Bridge through Hayden Valley on the east side of the Yellowstone River.
Grizzly bear, bison, elk, and moose—or their sign—are commonly seen on
this walk. All large animals are potentially dangerous and should not be
approached. A lone bull bison is alone for several reasons, one of which
may be that he just does not want any company. Also, for your own safety
and for their well-being you should never disturb wildlife with young.

The river teems with life. It is closed to fishing in Hayden Valley so
that nesting waterfowl can raise their young in peace. Look for ducks,
geese, trumpeter swans, pelicans, muskrat, mink, otter, and coyotes.

    [Illustration: GRAND CANYON AND FALLS OF THE YELLOWSTONE
    TRAILS, ROADS, AND FACILITIES]

  CANYON JCT.
    Showers And Laundry
    Cabins
    Campground
    Amphitheater
    Gas Station
    Visitor Center
    “P” Loop Cabins
    Riding Stable
      To Tower Junction
      To Norris Junction
  North Rim Drive
    Service Road
    Chittenden Bridge
    To Yellowstone Lake
  Cascade Lake Trail
  Howard Eaton Trail
    To Tower
    To 7 Mile Hole
    To Lake
  North Rim Trail
    Brink of Falls Trail
    Lookout Point
      Red Rock Point
    Grandview
    Glacial Boulder
    Inspiration Point
  Yellowstone River
    UPPER FALLS
    Cascade Creek
      Crystal Falls
    LOWER FALLS
  South Rim Trail
    Uncle Tom’s Trail
    Artist Point
    Sublime Point
    Silver Cord Cascade
  South Rim Drive
    UNCLE TOM’S PARKING AREA
  Clear Lake Trail
    Clear Lake
    Lily Pad Lake
  Ribbon Lake Trail
    Ribbon Lake
  Wapiti Lake Trail
  Sour Cr. Trail
      C.M.—T.T.—P.T. 67




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 66634 ***
